Title: ADB Approves $30 Million Financing to Strengthen Climate Resilience in Nepal - Asian Development Bank
Published: Mon, 30 Sep 2024 07:00:00 GMT
Source: Asian Development Bank

ABOUT ADB

Overview

Members

History

Annual Reports

Policies and Strategies

Partners

ORGANIZATION

Board of Governors

Board of Directors

President

Management

Departments and Country Offices

ACCOUNTABILITY

Access to Information

Accountability Mechanism

Anticorruption and Integrity

Development Effectiveness

Environmental and Social Requirements

Independent Evaluation

Administrative Tribunal

Ethics and Conduct

Ombudsperson

Strategy 2030

Annual Meetings

ABOUT ADB PROJECTS

Projects & Tenders

Project Results and Case Studies

PRODUCTS AND SERVICES

Public Sector Financing

Private Sector Financing

Financing Partnerships

Funds and Resources

KNOWLEDGE

Economic Forecasts

Publications and Documents

Data and Statistics

ADB and Civil Society

Development Asia

ADB Blogs

ADB Data Library

TOPICS

Agriculture and Food Security

Climate Change

Digital Technology

Education

Energy

Environment

Finance Sector

Fragility and Vulnerability

Gender Equality

Governance

Health

Markets Development and Public-Private Partnerships

Regional Cooperation

Social Development

Sustainable Development Goals

Transport

Urban Development

Water

CENTRAL AND WEST ASIA

EAST ASIA

SOUTH ASIA

SOUTHEAST ASIA

THE PACIFIC

ADB Central and West Asia Operations

Afghanistan

Armenia

Azerbaijan

Georgia

Kazakhstan|Русский

Kyrgyz Republic

Pakistan

Tajikistan

Turkmenistan

Uzbekistan

ADB East Asia Operations

Mongolia

People's Republic of China|中文

ADB South Asia Operations

Bangladesh

Bhutan

India

Maldives

Nepal

Sri Lanka

ADB Southeast Asia Operations

Cambodia

Indonesia|Bahasa Indonesia

Lao People's Democratic Republic

Myanmar

Philippines

Thailand

Timor-Leste

Viet Nam|Tiếng Việt

ADB Pacific Operations

Cook Islands

Federated States of Micronesia

Fiji

Kiribati

Marshall Islands

Nauru

Niue

Palau

Papua New Guinea

Samoa

Solomon Islands

Tonga

Tuvalu

Vanuatu

REGIONAL OFFICES

European Representative Office

Japanese Representative Office|日本語

North America Representative Office

LIAISON OFFICES

Pacific Liaison and Coordination Office

Pacific Subregional Office

Singapore Office

SUBREGIONAL PROGRAMS

Brunei, Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines East ASEAN Growth Area (BIMP-EAGA)

Central Asia Regional Economic Cooperation (CAREC) Program

Greater Mekong Subregion (GMS) Program

Indonesia, Malaysia, Thailand Growth Triangle (IMT-GT)

South Asia Subregional Economic Cooperation (SASEC)

CAREERS AND SCHOLARSHIPS

What We Look For

Career Opportunities

Young Professionals Program

Visiting Fellow Program

Internship Program

Scholarship Program

FOR INVESTORS

Investor Relations|日本語

ADB Green and Blue Bonds

ADB Theme Bonds

INFORMATION ON WORKING WITH ADB FOR...

Consultants

Contractors and Suppliers

Governments

Development Institutions

Private Sector Partners

Civil Society/Non-government Organizations

PROCUREMENT AND OUTREACH

Operational Procurement

Institutional Procurement

Business Opportunities Outreach

Projects & Tenders

ADB Approves $30 Million Financing to Strengthen Climate Resilience in Nepal

The Climate-Resilient Landscapes and Livelihoods Project will help communities in 24 municipalities prepare catchment management plans to ensure effective water resources management and water security.

The Climate-Resilient Landscapes and Livelihoods Project will help communities in 24 municipalities prepare catchment management plans to ensure effective water resources management and water security.

News from Country Offices | 30 September 2024

MANILA, PHILIPPINES (30 September 2024) — The Asian Development Bank (ADB) has approved a $30 million financing package to improve climate resilience, water resources management, and livelihoods of communities in Karnali and Sudurpashchim provinces in Nepal.

“Nepal is increasingly at risk from the devastating impacts of climate change, as extreme weather events become more frequent. The Karnali and Sudurpashchim provinces are assessed to be the most vulnerable regions to climate change, largely owing to the poor communities’ low coping capacity” said ADB Environment Specialist Sumit Pokhrel. “This project will help communities in the targeted project areas to be more climate-resilient, build their capacity to preserve and manage their natural resources, and expand nature-based livelihood opportunities that will boost the local economy.”

The package comprises a $10 million concessional loan and a $20 million grant from theAsian Development Fund, which provides grants to ADB’s poorest and most vulnerable developing member countries.

TheClimate-Resilient Landscapes and Livelihoods Projectwill help communities in 24 municipalities prepare catchment management plans to ensure effective water resources management and water security. The project will support the construction of small-scale drinking water systems and gravity-fed irrigation facilities. It will introduce water and soil conservation measures to protect landscapes from adverse effects of climate change. This includes the construction of soil erosion, surface runoff control, and infiltration structures; slope and stream bank stabilization; and land cover improvements such as nurseries, restoration of barren lands, and agroforestry.

ADB will provide grants to support nature-based livelihood investments such as the cultivation of medicinal and aromatic plants, non-timber forestry products, and indigenous crops. This will improve income opportunities of farmers and small and medium-sized enterprises, including women entrepreneurs. The project will also promote ecotourism in the region to diversify local communities’ income sources.

The project will build the capacity of federal, provincial and local governments to effectively plan, manage, and monitor water infrastructure, watersheds, and livelihood projects. At the local level, the project will train and inform communities on land and water preservation and conservation, and on nature-based livelihood opportunities.

ADB will administer an additional $2 million grant financed by the Community Resilience Partnership Program Trust Fund (CRPPTF) under the Community Resilience Financing Partnership Facility, which is dedicated to financing women-led small and medium enterprises. An additional $1.25 million grant from ADB’s Technical Assistance Special Fund and $500,000 from the CRPPTF is allocated for capacity building towards livelihood enhancement, ecotourism promotion, geographical indication, and independent project monitoring.

ADB is committed to achieving a prosperous, inclusive, resilient, and sustainable Asia and the Pacific, while sustaining its efforts to eradicate extreme poverty. Established in 1966, it is owned by 69 members—49 from the region.

Media Contact

Nepal

ADB funds and products

Agriculture and natural resources

Related

Nepal: Climate-Resilient Landscapes and Livelihoods Project

More on ADB's Work in Nepal

Latest News

News Release | 08 May 2025ADB Reaches Record $8.7 Billion in Nonsovereign Cofinancing in 2024ADB mobilized a record $8.7 billion in nonsovereign cofinancing in 2024, underscoring the growing role of private sector engagement in advancing development across Asia and the Pacific.

ADB mobilized a record $8.7 billion in nonsovereign cofinancing in 2024, underscoring the growing role of private sector engagement in advancing development across Asia and the Pacific.

News Releases, News from Country Offices | 08 May 2025ADB, Thai Union Sign the First Blue Loan for Sustainable Aquaculture in ThailandADB and Thai Union Group Public Company Limited (Thai Union) have signed a $150 million blue financing agreement to enhance the sustainability of shrimp production in Thailand.

ADB and Thai Union Group Public Company Limited (Thai Union) have signed a $150 million blue financing agreement to enhance the sustainability of shrimp production in Thailand.

News Releases, News from Country Offices | 08 May 2025ADB, Ulaanbaatar Flour Partner to Support Wheat Supply Chain in MongoliaADB and Ulaanbaatar Flour Limited Liability Company (UBF) signed a 3-year $10 million loan to support local wheat procurement to meet the increasing demand for domestically processed wheat flour in Mongolia. This financing will provide UBF with working capital to purchase wheat from local farmers.

ADB and Ulaanbaatar Flour Limited Liability Company (UBF) signed a 3-year $10 million loan to support local wheat procurement to meet the increasing demand for domestically processed wheat flour in Mongolia. This financing will provide UBF with working capital to purchase wheat from local farmers.

News Release | 06 May 2025ADB Welcomes Türkiye as Regional MemberADB today welcomed Türkiye as its newest regional member, strengthening ADB’s engagement in Central and West Asia.

We respect your privacy and aim for the best website experience. Allowing cookies enables a tailored experience, while disabling them may reduce personalization. For more information, please read ourTerms of Use.